.\" (c) 2019 Robert Clausecker <fuz@fuz.su>
.TH PAL 1 "2019-09-05" "8bc distribution" "General Commands"
.
.SH NAME
\fBpal\fR \(en a 2 pass PDP-8 pal-like assembler
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBpal\fR
[-\fBdr\fR]
\fIfile.pal\fR
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
This assembler accepts a subset of the PAL 8 assembly language.
It was written as a quick hack in order to download software into my
bare-bones PDP-8 system, and no effort has been made to apply sound
software engineering techniques in its design.  See the symbol table
and code for the set of pseudo-ops supported.  See DEC's \(lq\fI\,Programming
Languages (for the PDP/8)\/\fR\(rq for complete documentation of pseudo-ops,
or see DEC's \(lq\fI\,Introduction to Programming (for the PDP/8)\/\fR\(rq or a
lower level introduction to the assembly language.
.
.SH OPTIONS
This program takes the following command line switches
.IP \fB-d\fR
dump the symbol table at end of assembly
.IP "\fB-r\fR
produce output in rim format (default is bin format)
.
.SH FILES
This program uses the following file name extensions
.IP "\fB*.pal\fR"
source code (input)
.IP "\fB*.lst\fR"
assembly listing (output)
.IP "\fB*.bin\fR"
assembly output in DEC's bin format (output)
.IP "\fB*.rim\fR"
assembly output in DEC's rim format (output)
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR 8bc (1),
.BR as (1)
.
.SH AUTHORS
Douglas Jones \(la\fI\,jones@cs.uiowa.edu\/\fR\(ra \(en built basic bits
.br
Rich Coon \(la\fI\,coon@convexw.convex.com\/\fR\(ra \(en added enough handle OS/278
.br
Bernhard Baehr \(la\fI\,b.baehr@madsack.de\/\fR\(ra \(en patch to correct checksum
.
.SH KNOWN BUGS
Only a minimal effort has been made to keep the listing
format anything like the PAL-8 listing format.  It screams too loud
for off-page addresses (a quote mark would suffice), and it doesn't
detect off-page addresses it can't fix (it should scream about them).
.
.SH WARRANTEE
If you don't like it the way it works or if it doesn't work,
that's tough.  You're welcome to fix it yourself.  That's what you
get for using free software.
.
.SH COPYRIGHT NOTICE
I wrote this and gave it away for free; if you want to
make changes and give away the result for free, that's fine with me.
If you can fix it enough that you can sell it, ok, but don't put any
limits on the purchaser's right to do the same.  All the above aside,
if you improve it or fix any bugs, it would be nice if you told me
and offered me a copy of the new version.
